# Array

Arrays in C++ are a powerful data structure used to store multiple elements of the same data type in contiguous memory locations. 

**Declaring an array:** 

```cpp
int an_array[10];
```

Arrays are declared with a specific data type and size, which cannot be changed after declaration. here `[10]` is the number of elements an array should contain as declared by the developer.

Arrays can be initialized during declaration using curly braces `{}`. For example: `int arr[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};` by this there is no need to hard code the number of elements which an array might contain, compiler can auto assess the number of elements. this is called auto omitting of sizes.

At the time of initialization an `const` array can be declared. Elements of a `const` array cannot be modified through assignment. Attempting to modify a `const` array element results in a compile error. 

**Accessing the elements of an array:**

Elements of an array are accessed using indices, starting from 0. For example, `an_array[0]` accesses the first element. similarly the array propositions can be edited. `an_array[0] = 3;` 

**Incomplete initialization:**

```cpp
int an_array[6] {1, 4, 7};
```

By not giving all the elements while initializing an array may result to compiler to pad them with zeros. here: `{1, 4, 7, 0, 0, 0}` 

**Querying the size of an array on runtime:**

**M1:**

`std::size` manipulator can be used to identify the number of elements in an array.

```cpp
int my_array [] {0,4,4,3,2,6,4,4,9,4,2,8};
cout << std::size(my_array) << endl;
```

**M2:**

using `sizeof()` on an array will provide with the total number of bytes an array is using, which can be divided with the size one single element to identify number of elements in an array.

```cpp
int no_of_elements = sizeof(my_array) / sizeof (my_array[0]);
cout << no_of_elements << endl;
```

**Omitting elements with a for loop:**

**M1: range based for loop**

```cpp
for (size_t element : my_array){
    cout << element << endl;
}
```

`size_t`  is an unsigned integer data type in C++ that is used to represent the size of objects in bytes. and is commonly used for array indexing, loop counting, and other operations involving the size of positive data structures.

**M2: Manual range based loop:**

```cpp
for(size_t i{0}; i < std::size(my_array); ++i){
    cout << my_array[i] << endl;
}
```

**Multi dimensional arrays:**

Multidimensional arrays are essentially arrays of arrays, allowing for the storage of data in a tabular format. They can be utilized for various applications, such as representing matrices, game boards, or any other structure that requires multiple dimensions.

Two-dimensional arrays:

```cpp
dataType arrayName[size1][size2];
```

`size1` can be left with defining and compiler can identify that automatically. 

Initializing:

```cpp
int arr[3][4] {
    {1, 2, 3, 4},
    {5, 6, 7, 8},
    {9, 10, 11, 12}
};
```

Accessing elements using nested loops:

```cpp
for (int i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
    for (int j = 0; j < 4; j++) {
        cout << arr[i][j] << endl;
    }
}
```

Auto-filling:

Compiler can auto-fill values with 0, if they are not up to the mark as provided while initializing.

```cpp
int packages [][d2]{
    {1, 2, 3},
    {4, 5, 6},
    {7}
}
```

```cpp
/*
will become {
	..
	{7,0,0}
}    
*/
```