# Constant objects

A `const` object is declared using the `const` keyword, which prevents any modification to the object after it has been initialized.

```cpp
const Dog dog1("Fluffy", "Shepherd", 2);
```

In this case, `dog1` is a constant object of the `Dog` class. Once initialized, you cannot change its data members or call non-const member functions. For instance, attempting to call a non-const member function like `set_month` on a `const` object will result in a compilation error. The same happens even if you try to do the same via pointers or references.

**Passing `const` objects as function parameters:**

1. Passing by value:
    
    ```cpp
    void func(Dog dog){
    	dog.set_name("niger_dog");
    	dog.print_info();
    }
    ```
    
    This will work, because after passing the object by value, the function creates a copy, hence modifying that copy is not an issue for the original `const` object.
    
2. Passing by reference and `const` reference:
    
    ```cpp
    void func(Dog& dog){
    	dog.set_name("niger_dog");
    	dog.print_info();
    }
    ```
    
    This will not even compile, because the reference can be used to modify the original variable.
    
    ```cpp
    void func(const Dog& dog){
    	dog.set_name("niger_dog");
    	dog.print_info();
    }
    ```
    
    This will compile, but omit an error while modifying through a `const` object.
    
3. Passing via pointers and `const` pointers
    
    ```cpp
    void func(Dog* dog){
    	dog.set_name("niger_dog");
    	dog.print_info();
    }
    ```
    
    Works exactly the same as references.
    

From this perspective, the `const` objects are virtually useless, we can’t both read and write into them.

To solve this we might use `const` member functions

**`const` member functions:**

`const` member functions are functions that are declared as constant and cannot modify the values of the data members of their class, hence the compiler allows them to access those from a `const` object.

```cpp
//getter methods

string get_name() const{
	return dog_name;
}
```

Now we can `get_name()` from a `const` object.

```cpp
const Dog dog1("Fluffy", "Shepherd", 2);
dog1.get_name();
```

But we still can’t pass a `const` object as a non `const` parameter. The compiler prevents this by avoiding changing a `const` object through a reference. 

```cpp
void func(Dog& dog){
}
```

though a `const` object can be accepted as a `const` parameter.

```cpp
void func(const Dog& dog){
}
```

**Getters working as setters:**

```cpp
//class constructor:
Dog(const string &name_param, 
const string &breed_param, 
unsigned int age_param);
```

```cpp
//member function:
std::string &name(){
    return m_name;
}
```

Here we are returning our member variable directly as a reference, hence after calling this member function we can also get our name, but also use that to change the data from the following address.

```cpp
Dog dog1("Fluffy", "Shepherd", 2);
//as getter
cout << dog1.name() << endl;
//as setter
dog1.name() = "Oreo"; 
```

**Dangling pointers and references in objects:**

Dangling pointer with references:

```cpp
const string& dangling_references(){
    const string &info{"LOL"};
    return info;
}
```

Here we are returning a variable as a reference which will die after returning, hence the reference will dangle to a random memory address.

Dangling pointer with pointers:

```cpp
const string* dangling_pointers(){
    const string info{"LOL"};
    return &info;
}
```

**Mutable member variables:**

The `mutable` keyword is used to declare class member variables that can be modified even when accessed through a `const` member function or a `const` object. (for debugging purposes mainly.)

```cpp
mutable size_t print_info_count{0};
```

```cpp
void print_info () const{
   ++print_info_count;
   cout << print_info_count << endl;
}
```

```cpp
const Dog dog2("Milou", "Shepherd", 3);
dog2.print_info();
```

Will increment `print_info_counter` from a `const` function `print_info`.