# Integers

## Variable braced initialization

a variable may contain some random garbage value

```cpp
int elephant_count;
```

will initialize with zero

```cpp
int lion_count {};
```

will initialize with ten & fifteen respectively

```cpp
int dog_count {10};
int cat_count {15};
```

can use an existing expression as an initializer

```cpp
int domesticated_animals {dog_count + cat_count};
```

2.9 is a type double, a double needs more space to be stored than an integer hence you might lose some data or it might not run.

```cpp
int narrowing_conversion {2.9}
```

## Functional variable initialization

1. **Implicit Initialization**:
    
    the value of a variable is assigned during the processing of a function
    
    ```cpp
    void mouse_callback(double posX, double posY) {
        offsetX = posX - lastX;
        offsetY = lastY - posY;
        lastX = posX;
        lastY = posY;
    }
    ```
    

1. **Explicit Initialization**:
    
    assigning a value during its initialization
    
    ```cpp
    int a = 5;
    ```
    

1. **Dynamic Initialization**:
    
    is assigning a value to a variable during the runtime of the function. like using `cin` 
    
    ```cpp
    int a;
    cin >> a;
    ```
    

### The main differences between `int apple{0};` and `int apple(0);` in C++ are:

`int apple{0}` uses uniform initialization (also called list initialization) and will not allow narrowing conversions. For example, `int x {2.7};` will not compile because 2.7 can only be converted to int with losing information. `int apple(0);`  & `int apple = 0;` allows narrowing conversions. Integer can only store `4` bytes, hence if we try to place a double with a type name integer which is more than `4` bytes, it will chop off the extra bytes.

hence this is less safe than braced initialization.

`int apple{0}` performs zero-initialization if no value is provided inside the braces. `int apple{};` is equivalent to `int apple{0};`

- You can’t obviously start a variable with a number.
- case-sensitive

### Generalized syntax

```cpp
typename variable_name {initializer_value};
```

to check the size of a `typename` using `sizeof` 

```cpp
std::cout << "Size of " << sizeof(int) << std::endl;
```