# Making classes

A class is a user-defined data type that defines a collection of properties (data members) and behaviors (member functions) that the objects created from the class can have.

```cpp
class ClassName {
public:
    // Data members
    // Member functions
};
```

Member variables/Data members: will model the properties of the object.

Member functions: Member functions are functions defined inside a class that can manipulate the class's data members. They can be called using the object of the class with the dot operator (`.`).

```cpp
class Car {
public:
    string brand;
    string model;
    int year;

    void displayInfo() {
        cout << 
        brand << " " << model 
        << " " << year << endl;
    }
};
```

In this example, `Car` is the class name, and it has three data members: `brand`, `model`, and `year`, along with a member function `displayInfo()` that prints the car's information.

The member variables or functions under `public` can be accessed publically from the main function. By default, a class has everything `private`.

 

**Creating objects:**

Once a class is defined, objects can be created from it. An object is an instance of a class, and memory is allocated for it when the object is created. The syntax for creating an object is:

```cpp
ClassName objectName;
```

```cpp
int main() {
    Car myCar; 
    // Creating an object of Car
    myCar.brand = "Honda";
    myCar.model = "Civic";
    myCar.year = 2020;

    myCar.displayInfo(); 
    // Calling member function
    return 0;
}

```

In this example, `myCar` is an object of the `Car` class. The attributes are set, and the `displayInfo()` function is called to output the car's details.

**Access specifiers:**

C++ supports different access specifiers that control the visibility of class members:

- **public**: Members are accessible from outside the class.
- **private**: Members are accessible only from within the class itself.
- **protected**: Members are accessible within the class and by derived classes.

**Making `struct`:** 

The differences between `struct` and `class` are subtle but important, primarily revolving around access control and conventions for usage.

- Struct: Members of a struct are `public` by default. This means that any code that has access to the struct can directly access its members.
- Class: Members of a class are `private` by default. This restricts access to members unless they are explicitly declared as `public` or accessed through public member functions.

**Structural bindings:**

Structured bindings, introduced in C++17, allow for a more concise and readable way to unpack elements from structured types.

```cpp
auto [var1, var2, ...] = expression;
```

```cpp
struct Point {
    double x;
    double y;
};
Point p{1.0, 2.0};
auto [x, y] = p; 
// x = 1.0, y = 2.0
```

Now you can use `x` and `y` as copies of the member variables of the respective object.

These can even be passed to capture lists of lambda functions.