# Smart Pointers

Unique pointers, or `std::unique_ptr`, are a type of smart pointer. They provide a way to manage dynamic memory automatically, ensuring that memory is released when it is no longer needed, thus preventing memory leaks. These are available under `<memory>` header.

Creating a unique pointer:

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<Dog> unique_pointer {new Dog("Fluffy")};
unique_pointer->get_name();
```

To get a raw pointer managed by a unique pointer: 

```cpp
cout << unique_pointer.get() << endl;
```

Avoiding the use of `new` pointer in modern C++

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<Dog> udogp2 = std::make_unique<Dog>("Rex");
```

Unique pointers can't be copied or you can’t make two unique pointers point to the same memory location.

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<Dog> updog3 = udogp2;
//This is invalid
```

Though we can transfer the ownership of the memory to another unique pointer using `std::move` functionality:

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<Dog> updog3 = std::move(udogp2);
//This will hand over the memory to another pointer
//and set the old pointer to nullptr
```

Resetting a unique pointer:

```cpp
updog3.release();
```

**Passing unique pointers to functions:**

Unique pointers can’t be copied, hence the pointers can’t be passed to functions as value because that will create a local copy to the in the functional scope.

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<Dog> dog_up = 
std::make_unique<Dog>("Buddy");
some_function(dog_up); 
//this will omit an error
```

Either the unique pointers can be passed as reference or, the memory address can be moved to a the local scoped pointer that will die as the function ends.

```cpp
some_function(std::move(dog_up));
cout << "dog_up: " << dog_up.get() << endl;
//will omit nullptr
```

Making pointer arrays:

Stack:

```cpp
Dog stack_arr[] {Dog("1"), Dog("2")}; 
```

Raw Heap:

```cpp
Dog* heap_arr[] = new Dog[2]{Dog("1"), Dog("2")};
```

Unique Pointers:

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<Dog[]> uniq_arr = std::unique_ptr<Dog[]>(
	new Dog[2]{Dog("1"), Dog("2")}
);
```

**Shared pointers:**

`shared_ptr` is a smart pointer that manages the lifetime of dynamically allocated objects through 
reference counting. It allows multiple `shared_ptr` instances to share ownership of an object, ensuring that the resource is automatically deallocated when the last owner goes out of scope.

Internally, `shared_ptr` uses a control block that holds the reference count and a pointer to the managed object. This allows it to manage ownership and ensure proper deletion of resources.

The objects will be deleted from memory only when all the pointers pointing to the memory goes out of scope. 

Initializing `shared_ptr`:

```cpp
std::shared_ptr<int> shared_ptr {new int{100}};
```

Copying shared pointer to another shared pointer:

```cpp
std::shared_ptr<int> shared_ptr2 = shared_ptr;
```

Not the reference count aka the number of pointers managing the same memory is increased to 2.

```cpp
cout << "shared_ptr2: " << shared_ptr2.use_count() << endl;
//2
```

Using shared pointers to manage already existing memory:

```cpp
int *p = new int{300};
std::shared_ptr<int> ptr_managing_raw{p};
p = nullptr;
```

Resetting a shared pointer to reduce the reference count.

```cpp
ptr_managing_raw.reset();
```

Shared pointers are also castable to bools, if the pointer is pointing to something, it will return true, or false.

```cpp
if(shared_ptr) {
     cout << "pointing to something" << endl;
} else {
     cout << "not pointing to anything" << endl;
}
```

Converting unique pointer to shared pointer:

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<Dog> dog_up = std::make_unique<Dog>("Phil");
std::shared_ptr<Dog> converted_shared_ptr = std::move(dog_up);
```

We can't do vice versa; we can't convert a shared pointer to a unique pointer because if other shared pointers are pointing to the same memory, and one of them is being converted to a unique pointer, it won’t be a unique pointer any longer.

We can't directly assign a unique pointer to a shared pointer, we have to use `std::move`.

Though we can directly assign a unique pointer to a shared pointer which is returning from a function, this will make an implicit move.

```cpp
std::shared_ptr<int> 
int_ptr_accept(std::shared_ptr<int> p){
    cout << "int_ptr_accept: " << p.use_count() << endl;
    return p;
}

std::shared_ptr<Dog> dog2 = get_dog();
//implicitly moved via compiler.
```

Settings array using shared pointers:

`make_shared` is not supported in modern C++ for making array with shared pointers

```cpp
std::shared_ptr<int[]> shared_ptr_arr = 
std::make_shared<int[]>(5, 5, 6); 
//`make_shared` not supported in modern C++
```

```cpp
std::shared_ptr<int[]> 
shared_ptr_arr {new int[5]{5, 6, 7, 8, 9}};
```

Passing shared pointers to functions:

`shared_ptr` can be passed to functions by value unlike `unique_ptr`

However returning from reference is not valid because the reference count will be increased by 1, and when the function goes out of scope, the reference count will be decreased by 1, which will make the reference count 0, and the data will be deleted.

**Weak Pointers:**

A weak pointer in C++ is a type of smart pointer that provides a non-owning reference to an object managed by a `shared_ptr`. It is defined using the `std::weak_ptr` class template. Unlike `shared_ptr`, a `weak_ptr` does not affect the reference count of the managed object, meaning it does not extend the object's lifetime.
A `weak_ptr` allows you to observe an object managed by a `shared_ptr` without taking ownership. This is particularly useful for accessing an object without preventing its deletion when no `shared_ptr` instances remain.

```cpp
std::shared_ptr<Dog> shared_ptr1 = std::make_shared<Dog>("Puffy");
std::weak_ptr<Dog> weak_ptr (shared_ptr1);
```

We don’t have dereference operator or pointer reference operator for weak_ptr |  `*` `→`

`lock()` function can be used to convert `weak_ptr` to `shared_ptr` to access the memory.

```cpp
std::shared_ptr<Dog> weak_locked_to_shared = weak_ptr.lock();
cout << weak_locked_to_shared.get() << endl;
```

Usecase of weak pointers:

They are mainly used to solve cyclic dependency problem.

Here is a reference class:

```cpp
class Person
{
public:
    Person() = default;
    Person(std::string name);
    ~Person();
    
    //Member functions
    void set_friend(std::shared_ptr<Person> p){
        m_friend = p;
    }
    
private : 
    std::weak_ptr<Person> m_friend; // Initialized to nullptr
    std::string m_name {"Unnamed"};
};
```

Here, when p1 goes out of scope, it will not release memory of Ali, because another shared pointer which is a class member variable of object p2 is pointing to p1. And when p2 goes out of scope, it will not release the memory of Beth, because shared pointer of person member class of object Ali is pointing to the p2. Hence, here we are leaking memory.

```cpp
std::shared_ptr<Person> p1 = std::make_shared<Person>("Ali");
std::shared_ptr<Person> p2 = std::make_shared<Person>("Beth");
p1->set_friend(p2);
p2->set_friend(p1);
```

To solve this, we can change the member variable to weak pointer, and because weak pointer does not increment the reference count of the object hence will not prevent the object from being deleted.